docs(block-node): add Block Node Integration FAQ for CN/BN/MN developers (#3159)
hiero-ledger/hiero-block-node: docs/block-node/faq/integration-faq.md

Common integration and protocol questions for Consensus Node, Block Node, and Mirror
Node developers.

For term definitions, see the [Glossary](./glossary.md).
For operator questions, see the [Operator FAQ](./operator-faq.md).

---

## Publish stream protocol (CN → BN)

> **CN multi-BN routing:** When a stream closes due to an `EndOfStream` response, the
> CN does not necessarily reconnect to the same Block Node. If other Block Nodes are
> configured and eligible, the CN may route subsequent blocks to a higher-priority BN.
> A Block Node that generates repeated `EndOfStream` responses in a short window may be
> temporarily deprioritized by the CN before it is eligible to receive streams again.

### How does a Consensus Node initiate a publish stream to a Block Node?

The CN opens a **bidirectional gRPC stream** to
`BlockStreamPublishService.publishBlockStream`. The **first message in the stream must
be a `BlockHeader`** for the next expected block. The BN inspects the block number and
responds:

- If the block number is the next expected block → streaming continues normally.
- If the block number ≤ last verified block → BN responds with `DUPLICATE_BLOCK`.

> - If the block number > next expected → BN responds with `BehindPublisher`.

Reviewer: One missing case:
`- If the block number is one currently being streamed by another CN → BN responds with `SKIP_BLOCK` and streaming continues with the next block.`

The CN is always the client (initiator). The BN never dials a CN.

> See [Publish Block Stream](../design/communication-protocol/publish-block-stream.md) for more details.

### What does the Block Node send back during streaming?

The BN can send five response types during an active stream:

|        Response        |                    When sent                    |                What the CN should do                |
|------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|
| `BlockAcknowledgement` | After block proof received and verified         | Continue streaming the next block                   |

> | `SkipBlock`            | Another publisher already delivered this block  | Skip to the block indicated and continue            |

Reviewer: Minor adjustments:
1. Acknowledgement means the block is secured and should be noted as such (possibly removing the block from buffers).
1. Skip does not specify a block to _skip to_, it returns the _current_ block so the skip can be matched to the corresponding header already sent (in case more than one block is sent before the skip is received), and means "skip the current block".

```suggestion
| `BlockAcknowledgement` | After block proof received and verified         | Mark block secured and continue streaming the next block |
| `SkipBlock`            | Another publisher is currently sending this block  | Skip the current block and continue with the next |
```

| `ResendBlock`          | BN needs the CN to resend from a specific block | Resend from the block number specified              |
| `BehindPublisher`      | BN is behind — CN is too far ahead              | Start a new stream from the block number specified  |
| `EndOfStream`          | Terminal — stream is closed                     | See the status code and take the appropriate action |

### What does `DUPLICATE_BLOCK` mean and what should the CN do?

> `DUPLICATE_BLOCK` (code 5 in `EndOfStream`) means the block header the CN sent

Reviewer: I'm not sure we want to call out the ordinal on these, as the enumeration is defined in the schema and any SDK implementations will have matching enumerations or constants defined.

corresponds to a block that is already stored and verified by the BN. The CN closes the
stream and resumes streaming — to this BN or a different available Block Node — beginning
with the block after the last persisted and verified block.

### What does `TOO_FAR_BEHIND` mean and what should the CN do?

`TOO_FAR_BEHIND` (code 4 in `EndOfStream`) means the BN is too far behind the CN to
catch up by streaming alone. The CN should:

1. Switch streaming to a different Block Node.
2. Include `earliest_block` and `latest_block` in the `EndStream` message so the
   falling-behind BN can attempt to backfill from a peer.

> 3. Resume streaming to this BN later once it has caught up via backfill.

Reviewer: This enum no longer exists (see enum [here](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/hiero-block-node/blob/main/protobuf-sources/src/main/proto/block-node/api/block_stream_publish_service.proto#L360)).

### What does `PERSISTENCE_FAILED` mean and is the block lost?

`PERSISTENCE_FAILED` (code 7 in `EndOfStream`) means the BN failed to durably store
the block. **The block is not necessarily lost** — the CN still has it. The CN must:

1. Start a new stream and resend the block to this BN or a different reliable BN.
2. **Not discard the block** until it has been acknowledged as persisted and verified by
   at least one BN.

### What does `BAD_BLOCK_PROOF` mean?

`BAD_BLOCK_PROOF` (code 6 in `EndOfStream`) means a `BlockProof` item could not be
validated. The CN closes the stream and resumes streaming — to this BN or a different
available Block Node — from before the failed block.

### When does the Block Node send `TIMEOUT` to the Consensus Node?

`TIMEOUT` (code 4 in `EndOfStream`) is sent when the delay between stream items
exceeds the BN's configured timeout — the CN did not deliver the next item within the
allowed window. The CN closes the stream and resumes streaming — to this BN or a

> different available Block Node — from before the timed-out block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
different available Block Node — from the timed-out block.
```

### How does a Mirror Node subscribe to the block stream?

The MN opens a **server-streaming gRPC call** to
`BlockStreamSubscribeService.subscribeBlockStream` with a `SubscribeStreamRequest`:

```protobuf
message SubscribeStreamRequest {
  uint64 start_block_number = 1;
  uint64 end_block_number   = 2;   // set to uint64 max for an indefinite stream
}
```

The BN responds with a stream of `SubscribeStreamResponse` messages containing
`block_items`, `end_of_block`, and finally a terminal `status` code when the stream
closes.

> See [Mirror Node Integration](./mirror-node-integration.md) for more details.

### What is the difference between `INVALID_START_BLOCK_NUMBER` and `NOT_AVAILABLE`?

|               Code               |                                                           Meaning                                                           |                              What to do                               |
|----------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | `INVALID_START_BLOCK_NUMBER` (4) | `start_block_number` is structurally invalid — negative, below `first_available_block`, or beyond the future-request window | Fix the request parameters; do not retry with the same value          |

Reviewer: Technically negative numbers aren't possible (the field is `uint64`), so the value is either below the first available block, or too far in the future.

| `NOT_AVAILABLE` (6)              | The block is not available on this BN at this time (e.g. pruned, or node is still backfilling)                              | Retry later with exponential backoff, or query a different Block Node |

### What should a subscriber do on `NOT_AVAILABLE`?

The subscriber **may retry with exponential backoff** against the same BN, or
**fall over to a lower-priority BN** that covers the requested block range. Check

> `serverStatus` on available BNs to find one whose range includes the needed block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`serverStatusDetail` on available BNs to find one whose available ranges include the needed block.
```

Detect gaps client-side by comparing `end_of_block.block_number` against
`(last_committed_block + 1)`. Do not rely on the BN to signal gaps — the BN feeds

> slow subscribers from history, not from the live stream, and does not produce gaps.

Reviewer: This is a bit confusing.
I'm not sure what gap detection is about here in relation to what to do on "not available".
BN feeds subscribers from a combination of live and history as needed, and _may_ return not available at any point if it encounters a gap.

_Possible_ rewrite (not sure, just a first pass)

```suggestion
Clients may avoid this result by checking for gaps client-side.
Gaps are reported clearly when calling `serverStatusDetail` which returns
`available_ranges` covering all blocks available on that node. If the node has
all blocks then it will return a single range from `0` through the latest
persisted block.
The Subscribe API stream delivering blocks at the "live" edge, because it is
live and unverified, _may_ deliver blocks out of order, but _should_ deliver
the out-of-order block within a reasonable time.
```

never introduced by the BN — they can only come from the upstream unverified CN→BN
stream.

Blocks delivered from the live queue are unverified and may contain errors, be
repeated, or be incomplete. Subscribers are responsible for verifying each block using
its `BlockProof`.

> See [Mirror Node Integration](./mirror-node-integration.md) for more details.

---

## Block Access API

### What is the difference between `NOT_FOUND` and `NOT_AVAILABLE` in `getBlock`?

|        Code         |                                                           Meaning                                                            |
|---------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `NOT_FOUND` (4)     | The block **should** be available on this BN (within its managed range) but was not found — may be a transient storage issue |
| `NOT_AVAILABLE` (5) | The block is **outside** this BN's managed range — the BN has never held it or it has been pruned                            |

For `NOT_AVAILABLE`, call `serverStatus` to determine the BN's `firstAvailableBlock`

> and `lastAvailableBlock`, then query a BN that covers the needed range.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For `NOT_AVAILABLE`, call `serverStatusDetail` to determine the BN's `available_ranges`,
then query a BN that covers the needed range.
```

| `messageSizeSoftLimitBytes` | ❌        | Soft limit on per-request payload size; default 2,097,152 bytes (2 MB)            |
| `messageSizeHardLimitBytes` | ❌        | Hard limit on per-item payload size; default 131,072,000 bytes (125 MB)           |

> See [Configure Consensus Node Streaming](./operations/consensus-node-to-block-node-configuration.md) for more details.

### What is `writerMode` and when do I need `FILE_AND_GRPC` vs `GRPC`?

`blockStream.writerMode` in CN `application.properties` controls where the CN writes
block data:

|      Mode       |                                     Behaviour                                      |
|-----------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `FILE`          | Write to local disk only; Block Nodes receive nothing                              |
| `FILE_AND_GRPC` | Write to local disk **and** stream to configured Block Nodes (recommended default) |
| `GRPC`          | Stream to Block Nodes only; no local files written                                 |

Use `GRPC` when the CN should not retain local block files and all history is owned by

> Block Nodes. Use `FILE_AND_GRPC` to keep a local backup while streaming.

Reviewer: This is subtly inaccurate:

```suggestion
|      Mode       |                                     Behaviour                                      |
|-----------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `FILE`          | Write to local disk only; Block Nodes receive nothing                              |
| `FILE_AND_GRPC` | Write to local disk **and** stream to configured Block Nodes (recommended before "cutover") |
| `GRPC`          | Stream to Block Nodes only; no local files written (Required after "cutover")               |

Use `GRPC` when the CN must stream to block nodes only, and all history is owned by Block Nodes.
Use `FILE_AND_GRPC` before "cutover" to send blocks while still directly uploading data to legacy cloud buckets.
```
